Hello, and welcome to Linux Action News. Episode 237, recorded on April 20, 2022. I'm Chris.
And I'm Wes.
Hello, Wes. Let's do the news.
And we start with something going down in NVIDIA town. Another week, and another code
drop for review. This latest 13,000 lines of kernel driver code are responsible for
the direct rendering manager in NVIDIA's deep learning accelerator.
You may have also heard to it referred as NVDLA. And a few years back in 2017, NVIDIA
made the announcement that suggested some deep learning hardware would have an open
source driver component sometime in the future. Well, the future is now.
At least we hope. There's also we should say an open source user mode driver that interfaces
with this new kernel driver, including some stuff around the compiler and runtime code.
Slater stump is out for review right now. And if that goes well, it could clear the
way for the NVDLA stack to be at least considered for mainline kernel adoption sometime down
the line.
Right. And then we'd be looking at an open source driver from NVIDIA in the kernel and
open source user space driver as well. And one wants to believe maybe NVIDIA is building
towards something here, establishing new relationships and doing things differently, laying some
kind of groundwork for maybe an open source driver for the rest of their hardware.
But I think the other way to look at this is NVIDIA is really just kind of doing the
bare minimum to create a competitive developer focused product in 2022. And they probably
should have this thing out in 2019. I mean, it could be that or it could be that we are
seeing a change in how they approach kernel software development. Only time will tell,
but we'll keep our eye on it.
Well since we love talking about kernel level goodies here on the show, it caught our attention
this week that Sony made a rather notable contribution.
Yeah, if you're like us and you're wondering, well, OK, I can imagine Sony does a lot of
contributions for like the PlayStation, but what else does Sony contribute to the Linux
kernel? Well, I'm happy to say this week, it's speed, at least for the exFAT file system.
Yeah, and a rather impressive 73% improvement at that. What's going on under the hood?
Well, previously before this patch, when an exFAT file system was mounted in its dir sync
mode and then went to go zero out and on disk cluster, that request would be translated
into sector by sector requests, which generated a ton of tiny little requests that really
kept the exFAT file system from being able to perform as fast as the hardware would otherwise
allow, basically just getting bogged down with bookkeeping. But after this patch, those
requests will instead be submitted all in one big go, which reduces the number of tiny
little requests and unlocks the true speed of whatever hardware you might be using. In
this case, Sony engineer Yu-Heng Mo tested this out on an ARM platform with a pretty
bog standard SD card and found that performance improvements actually started at 73% and went
even higher for larger block sizes.
Oh, I love hearing that. And so this patch has been queued this week in the Linux exFAT
file system driver development branch, and this performance improvement should land for
Linux 5.19 later this summer.
There are some weeks when a free software project just sees a flurry of new development.
But unlike commercial software companies that can batch those announcements together and
have careful marketing language, praise them on a large stage with fancy graphics and lights,
the open distributed nature of free software, well, they can just mean that some of the
best work just flies right under the radar. And I think that might be happening with Plasma.
KDE developer Nate Graham came out this week with his KDE development summary, as he does
pretty much every week. After reading through it, though, I think it might just be the year
of the Wayland desktop.
Absolutely. There are so many nice features, fixes and improvements for Wayland users pretty
much throughout everything in the Plasma desktop, like even like the awake drop down terminal
has one of my favorite fixes. There's some crash fixes of the lock screen, even inside
the task manager, the way things display for processes running on Wayland or X11 or X Wayland
now look better the way virtual desktops are handled. I mean, on and on you guys. If you
run Wayland, you're getting a fix. You're getting a fix. Everyone gets a Wayland fix.
Yeah, no kidding. There are a ton of fixes all over the place, even outside of Wayland.
The list, it's long. But one bug fix that caught my particular attention, KDE apps that
are capable of opening PSD files no longer crash when opening a malformed image. Super
random, yes, but that's the kind of polish that's just really nice to see, especially
since PSD files come from all kinds of sources and still show up way more than I'd like.
I just ended up getting sent one earlier this week. I'm like, Oh, yeah, okay. All right.
I think I can do this. We'll have a link to Nate's full post so you can read through this
and you can expect these improvements to trickle into the next few releases of Plasma. But
zooming out and looking at the free desktops, major desktop players now with GNOME 42 landing
in everyone's hands in Fedora 36 and Ubuntu 2204, which are shipping just in a matter
of days as we record this. Both of those distros are using Wayland by default, even in Fedora's
case with the NVIDIA driver. And you just put it all together. It's like we were kind
of joking, but maybe a little more serious than joking. It does indeed feel like the
year of the Wayland desktop, with Ubuntu and Fedora shipping it as default, with Plasma
and the GNOME project working so hard to make it work as smooth to the point now where it
often works and performs better than it does on X. Well, it's like the transition is really
here now. We've been talking about it for a decade, but it's real now and it's happening
at scale and it's only going to accelerate from here.
A very observant Pharaonix reader noted a newly started experiment to give Google Chrome
a Qt backend. Yeah, I know. It's very early days and to be honest, there's a whole bunch
of things here that indicate that maybe it's just a proof of concept, flags like do not
land or work in progress labels everywhere. But it does make you wonder, what is Google's
interest in using Qt? Honestly, I'm not quite sure right now, but I'd love to hear your
best guesses. Send us a boost.
Linode dot com slash land. Go there to get $100 in 60 day credit on a new account and
you go there to support the show. Linode offers options for developers, users and businesses
that don't want the complexities of the hyperscalers and you don't need all of their endless options.
You want something that covers everything, does what it focuses on right. That's Linode.
That's how we run everything for the last few years. And like us, Linode loves Linux.
They use it every day in their environment and their production and their tools. It's
why they built Linode almost 19 years ago. And now they are the developers cloud. You
want to build a project? Go to Linode. You want to learn something? Go to Linode. And
customer support over there is the best. And on top of that, they have the best performance
benchmarked by independent providers. And they have 11 data centers for you to choose
from. They have great features like object storage, cloud firewall, fantastic backups
and much, much more. They got an API. It'll be so easy for you to build tooling around.
You'll be surprised you never tried it. And I mean it. I'm not like Mr. Developer over
here and I can make it work. It's pretty great. So go build something. Go learn something.
Go try it for yourself and support the show. See why it's so great. See why it's one of
the remaining standing champions. linode.com slash lan. Get $100 in 60 day credit and kick
the tires for yourself. Look, they've survived against the big tech monopolies this long.
They must be doing something right. Go see what it is and get $100 to try it yourself.
linode.com slash lan. And a big thank you to Ting, linux.ting.com. If you're sick of
overpaying for your cell service, go see how much you could save and get $25 off of that
partner. Yeah, I just got a little Southwest there because Ting is so great. I'll put a
cowboy hat on to celebrate it. I don't know why, but that's what I feel like. I've been
a customer since 2013 and I can tell you wholeheartedly, it's the smarter way to do mobile. It's the
way they have to do it today. But since we have the environment we have, Ting's like
a next generation Ninja network. They're a mobile virtual network operator that rides
on top of the big duopoly's nationwide network. Short to short coverage with Ting, but you
pay their fantastic great prices and you get their best customer support. Ting was just
recently named the number one carrier by Consumer Reports in 2021. They have plans for those
of you who are super price savvy and they have plans for those of you who've got a lot
of work to get done. And it's simple to switch to Ting. Pretty much any phone's gonna work
and there's no contracts ever. So just head to linux.ting.com. Check your current phone,
create an account and pick the plan that's right for you. Ting will send you a SIM card.
You're gonna pop that thing in. You'll get activated in minutes and you'll think to yourself,
why didn't I start saving money sooner? There's never been a better time to start saving money
on those monthly costs and Ting's a great way to do it because you get access to those
same networks. You just get Ting's great prices. Linux.ting.com. Midway through the Fedora 36
development cycle, a proposal was submitted for the next release of Fedora 37 to deprecate
legacy BIOS support, which would make Fedora a UEFI only operating system, at least on
x86. And as Michael Horrible over at Pharaonix noticed, this really seemed to kick the proverbial
hornet's nest with many Fedora users coming out of the woodwork to express their concern
at this idea.
Yeah, you can imagine if you've been around the Linux community for a while, this kicks
off robust conversation, not just on the official mailing list, but all around Fedora in the
wider community, including even, you know, in our channels with our community. And project
lead Matthew Miller noted that they've gotten 300 plus messages and that threatened just
one week. And within that time frame, they had 66 different participants. And he noted
that that handily beaded discussions around system D resolve D, butter a fast by default
and even the big switch to nano as the default editor. And it seemed like in the thread that
many were adamant for Fedora to keep the legacy BIOS support and seemed like a lot of them
were critical of what they felt was Red Hat clearly looking to reduce their support burden
and just have the simplicity of focusing on hardware released in the past decade.
So it seems like what might happen is rather than gutting out legacy BIOS support right
away may lead to the creation of a new Fedora special interest group or SIG that would be
tasked with maintaining and testing future Fedora releases with legacy BIOS compatibility.
Honestly, that might be the best happy middle ground right now. I can certainly appreciate
why people still want legacy BIOS support, especially in the open source and free software
world and especially for Linux operating systems in particular, which I mean, over the years,
how many stories have we heard on on the network about folks that, you know, their original
operating system dropped support, but good old Linux still made it work. Right. As you
say, though, Chris, we got to balance this because there are real maintenance considerations
and Fedora's got something of a reputation these days as pushing the leading edge, which
I'm not sure you can really call legacy BIOS anymore.
Okay, that's fair. And you also kind of have to wonder, like, is Fedora uniquely positioned
in this architecture where they have these special interest groups, where dedicated members
who are interested in something can dedicate their resources, their time, their talent
without putting undue burden on the primary project team? That does seem like a pretty
good middle ground. It seems like a way to kind of measure interest over the long term
as well. But it really, really just touches on a core issue in our community that comes
up in various iterations again and again. Another iteration of this is dropping 32 bit
support and going with a 64 bit only distro. And it's that same kind of divide that is
a divide in how people perceive free software should be made available. And it's a divide
in the value that people place on hardware and what is reasonable in maintaining hardware
support. And it's like people have very strong feelings and opinions on these things, and
it comes together in these sorts of issues. And I think the other thing that stands out
to me, Wes, and I'm curious to know your take on this, is I feel like the argument that,
well, there's lots of distros to choose from, so just run a different distro that still
has BIOS support. That sort of works. But in my opinion, it kind of falls down because
we all know the reality is the further you go from a mainstream distro, the more challenging
you're going to have, especially as maybe a user who's not super proficient. And so
we're basically saying, well, you're going to just have to go live on Niche Island.
Yeah, I do think there is that aspect, you know, it comes and goes and what exactly you
consider niche, you know, may vary. So it might be that just moving over and sticking
on something like Debian could keep you happy here for quite some time because, you know,
they've kind of got a different approach to some of these issues. But you're right, you
know, maybe Debian is not the operating system you want to use or let's own up a little here.
We're pushing Fedora pretty hard these days, right? Because they're doing a lot of neat
new stuff that we like, we find useful, we want to play with. And if you're suddenly
told, well, there's this one thing about your hardware, which means, nope, sorry, you just
don't have access to that.
And there is the reality that the longer we can get life out of older hardware, the more
sustainable that makes this equipment, the better it is for the entire world. And so
there's that like very strong argument too. And there is the absolutely unavoidable reality
that we have limited developer time and limited developer focus that can go towards these
projects. And we have to treat that like a precious commodity as well. And so these seem
to me like very hard problems to solve. And Fedora sort of seems like the ideal place
to sort this out because they are seen as a leading edge distribution, because they
have these special interest groups that can take some of the burden off of the primary
project. And they can develop something here, they can work something out that I think eventually
other distributions will learn from. And so it's sort of great that it's starting here
with Fedora. I mean, it's not necessarily starting here, but it's going mainstream
with Fedora.
Yeah, it does seem like it might be a particularly effective way to handle this just in that,
you know, boot support is not entirely, but often components of it are limited to sort
of getting the operating system booted. And once you've got the regular old kernel running,
once you're in user space, you got your desktop, maybe the changes can be minimal versus something
like, you know, keeping 32 bit support around, which involves a lot more recompilation. You
know, in this world, that might just mean that the folks who are interested in keeping
the support alive, well, they'd have to deal with some of the bug reports coming in, they'd
have to do testing for upcoming releases and verify that legacy BIOS support works. But,
you know, grub supports both. So if you can just keep grub going and allow those extra
options, maybe it's a couple additional packages with a couple different defaults. That seems
like it might work at least for as long as those with BIOS still need it.
There is a lot in Fedora 36 under the hood and for the desktop, and it's coming out in
just a matter of days, currently aiming for an April 26, 2022 release. Go check out Linux
Unplugged episode 454 for our rundown and all the new stuff in there. And of course,
as we record now, Ubuntu 22.04 is scheduled to release tomorrow. We also covered that
in Linux Unplugged 454. And that is an LTS release. So there's a lot to discuss there
as well. But that does bring us to the end of this week's broadcast. So go get every
episode of Linux Action News by going to linuxactionnews.com slash subscribe for all the ways to get every
episode. And linuxactionnews.com slash contact to let us know how upset about the BIOS removal
you really are. And get your message and your feedback to the front of the line. Send us
a boost with a new podcast app, newpodcastapps.com. We'll see you right back here next week for
our take on the latest Linux and open source news. Thanks for joining us. And that's all
the news for this week.